Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lobs sent
to the MEN by Doctor David Henschel. He's professor
of molecular physiology and neuroscience in the Department of
Physiology and Medical Physics at the Royal College of
Surgeons in Ireland. And we're, and today we're going
to talk about his book, FineTuning Life, A Guide
to MicroRNAs, your genomes master regulators. So, Doctor Henschel,
welcome to the show. It's a big pleasure to
everyone.
Thank you very much for having me. I'm delighted
to be here.
Well, I guess that this, uh, interview is very
timely just because very recently, someone won the Nobel
Prize in physiology or medicine due to the discoveries
surrounding microRNA. So, uh, but before we get into
microRNA specifically, just to Perhaps familiarize the audience with
some of the basics here. What would you say
are the most important things for people to understand
about DNA and RNA for them, for them to
then understand the rest of our conversation surrounding microRNA?
So, yeah, we can start perhaps with DNA because
that's the the molecule that I think everyone is
most familiar with. So DNA or deoxyribonucleic acid is
the genetic material that we have in all the
cells in our, in our bodies. It's essentially a
program instructions for building an organism. In our case,
so our DNA contains the information to build a,
a human, and obviously, once that human is built
to keep it functioning the way it should. So
DNA is an extremely long molecule, but essentially it's
um code if you like, the information is made
up of one of four different chemicals we call
bases. And they are given the short letters A,
C, G, and T. And essentially when we talk
about DNA, what we're really talking about is, is
genes and genetic information. And what most people think
of with genes are genes that contain the information
to build proteins in cells. So proteins are really
what cells use for the vast majority of their
activities. An example of a protein would be hemoglobin,
which of course carries oxygen in the blood, or
insulin, which regulates our blood glucose levels. But actually
cells use hundreds of different proteins to carry out
all of their activities. Now the information to build
that protein is, is contained within DNA. So a
gene is really the instructions to make a, a
protein. But we don't jump straight from DNA to
protein. There's uh an intermediate molecule called RNA or
ribonucleic acid. So information flows from, from DNA via
RNA to to protein. So how this all starts
is that the DNA, which is in a helix
normally, uh, within the nucleus of our cells. Opens
up, so it sort of unzips. And then the
gene can be read, so the gene for that
particular protein, let's say, say hemoglobin, can be red.
So what happens is an RNA copy is made
of the DNA. So RNA is very similar to
DNA. It's a sort of chemical cousin. Called ribonucleic
acid, or RNA for short. So this long sequence
of ACGT, ACGT GGG, CCT, TTT, this is the
information within the DNA that is basically red, and
we generate an RNA for that gene. That RNA
now moves out of the nucleus of the cell
and moves into a different part of the cell
to build the protein. So that RNA eventually uh
gets sent to something called the ribosome, which is
a sort of protein production facility. And the RNA
gets threaded through this ribosome and as it does
so, amino acids are joined together. One after the
other and that long chain of amino acids becomes
our protein. Mhm. So, the DNA is the information
to build the protein. RNA is the molecule that
takes that sort of information, and then that is
translated into this amino acid sequence that becomes uh
the, the protein.
Right. Uh, AND so we have, uh, transcription, we
have translation, but I mean, uh, that is the
most, the simplest way of describing the, the, describing
the process, but then we also have things like
gene regulation, right? And that's I think one of
the places where microRNAs play the biggest role, correct?
Yeah, absolutely, so. Genes are switched on and off,
OK, and, and certain types of cells require certain
types of proteins. So if you give the example
of hemoglobin, our red blood cells want to be
packed full of hemoglobin, but red blood cells don't
need to produce, for example, say, neurotransmitters or or
or insulin. So cells throughout the body produce different
types of protein for the for the jobs, the,
the, the functions that they have. And this is
where gene regulation comes in. So DNA is the,
it contains instructions for making all of the genes
that we need, but particular cells, particular tissues will
only select, they'll kind of pick and choose which
genes are going to be switched on and off.
Now, to switch a gene on. We actually require
something called a transcription factor, which is a particular
protein or group of proteins that will bind onto
a region of DNA near the gene, and it's
sort of the on switch for that gene to
start getting um switched on and for RNA copies
to be made of that of that gene. And
then we have other types of regulators. That switch
genes off afterwards. So a gene may be switched
on for a, for a period of time and,
and then switched off. Other, other genes may be
switched on sort of almost continuously. Some genes are,
are, are switched on and off very, very rapidly,
very dynamically.
Uh, AND so, uh, I mean, uh, before we
get into microRNA specifically in that process that you
described earlier of first transcription and then translation, we
also have particular kinds of RNA molecules playing roles
in transcript. And we have uh MRNA and in
translation TRNA, right? I mean, I'm asking you that
because I will also want to try to understand
the different kinds of RNA molecules that are out
there and how they relate to one another.
Yes, so there's actually lots of different types of
RNA. The type of RNA I've described so far
as, as you said, is mRNA or messenger RNA.
That's the RNA that, that, that carries the information
uh to the ribosome to, to build the protein.
But our genome, the collection of all of the
genetic information, our genome produces many other types of
RNA which are functional within the cell that do
other jobs. So one of the examples you just
gave was something called TRNA or transfer RNA. So
this is a little RNA that works within that
ribosome to bring the amino acids one at a
time in. As that chain is built. In fact,
the ribosome itself is made up of something called
RNA or ribosomal RNA, which is another huge molecule
that helps form this protein production factory. What we've
discovered really over the last um couple of decades,
and, and this sort of brings us closer to
what microRNA's are, is there's all these other types
of RNA. That get transcribed, don't code for protein,
but that do other important jobs with how genes
switch on uh and switch off.
Right. And so, what are microRNAs then and how
do they relate to these other different kinds of
RNA molecules?
So microRNAs are a class or a category of
short or small RNA. So these are not RNAs
that that code for protein. These are part of
the big sort of soup of RNAs that work
to regulate gene activity. And micro microRNAs are, are
produced uh a little bit like um other genes.
They're, they're red from DNA. And a sequence is
produced, quite a long sequence initially, a sort of
a precursor molecule of the microRNA. But as that
microRNA starts to move on its journey, it gets
cut down to size. And so the the actual
functional part of the microRNA is actually quite short.
It's only around 20, about 20 to 22 nucleotides.
Um, SO the nucleotides, that relates to what we
said earlier about the, the, the chemical bases in,
in DNA. RNA also has 4 types of chemical
bases. Uh, THE A and the C and the
G are all the same, but it has a,
a, a slightly different 4th base instead of a
T that we have in DNA, it has a
U. Um, BUT, but otherwise it has this sort
of same four bases. So a microRNA when it's
produced, when it's functioning, is about 20 of these
nucleotides long, which is, which is really quite, quite
short.
Mhm. Uh, BUT, but then, I mean, because we
have these different kinds of RNA molecules, do they
have any sort of relationship between them just because
they are all RNA molecules of different sorts or
not?
So the main differentiator really is, is the sort
of the length of the molecule and its specific
chemistry. So a messenger RNA has some very specific
uh regions within it. That um it has obviously
the region which codes for the protein, but it
also has a sort of a top and a
tail, which contain information that tells that messenger RNA
where to go and to get threaded through the
ribosome and, and so forth. And all of the
other types of RNA that we have, the longer
RNAs, the short RNAs, the microRNAs, they also have
information within that sequence that um it tells them,
you know, where to be and how to work
properly.
Yeah. And how and when were microRNAs discovered?
So microRNAs were discovered in 1993 in the back
to back papers in the journal Cell, which is
one of the top journals in the world, and
it was the discovery that was made at that
time that that recently just got the Nobel Prize
for the, for the two senior people on those
first two papers, uh, Victor Ambrose and Gary Rufkin.
So, what they were doing at the time was
they were interested in understanding how organisms develop. And
and they used an organism called C. ELEGANS, uh,
which is a very small, quite a simple worm.
It only has about 1000 cells in the in
the sort of adult worm. And um the work
of, of themselves and others had been focused on
thinking, look, if we can understand how a simple
animal develops from a single cell to its adult
form and understand the gene programs that switch on
and off as that organism develops. Perhaps we'll learn
a little bit more about more complex organisms, including
humans also develop and, and that turned out to
be uh to be true in, in many different
ways. So at the time of the discovery of
microRNAs, the two labs were trying to understand which
genes were switching on and off at the time
that the worm transitioned from one phase to its
to another phase, sort of from its early development
to its adult form. And they'd zoned in on,
on two different genes, LIN 4 and Lin 14,
and they were sort of playing around with, um,
worms that had mutations in these genes. And they,
they'd figured out that there was some. Interactions, some
influence between these 22 genes, and then when they
looked at this LIN 4 gene, they found that
it, it didn't code for a protein. In fact,
it seemed to produce only short RNAs. And so
they, they looked at these RNAs and then sort
of came this eureka moment where they managed to
align that short RNA to a region. Of the
messenger RNA for this other gene, Lin 14, and
they found that it would stick onto it a
little bit like sort of molecular Velcro. That there's
certain pairing rules between these nucleotides. So, uh, a
C and a G will always match and an
A and a U will always match. So they
found that this LIN 4 gene would stick on
to LIN 14. And then they, they came to
the realization that. This was maybe a new way
that genes were being controlled. That some genes basically
work by interfering with the production of the protein
and, and, and the idea from their, their discovery
was that this short RNA stuck onto the messenger
RNA. And blocked that protein from being produced. And
it turned out that this was a really key
event that this LIN 14 uh protein had to
be switched off in order for the adult animal
to uh to, to develop. And so this, this,
this was basically a, a new type of gene
activity control that had been er discovered.
And so also for people to understand a little
bit better, how we learn more about microRNAs. What
are the, perhaps the main tools that we have
at our disposal to learn about them?
So we can um detect the presence of microRNAs
uh within cells. We can um analyze RNA levels
using a variety of experimental and sort of uh
biochemical techniques quite, quite easily. And then we can
begin to map these into the genome. So we've
been able over time to identify all of the
microRNAs that are present within different organisms, including humans.
So you can, you can count the number of
these microRNA genes and you can learn on which
chromosomes they are in. And um you can also
study how they're produced. So there's a specific pathway
in terms of the, the sort of the reading,
uh, of the, the microA gene. The production of
the initial precursor molecule, the, the cutting down phases,
all of these little steps have been worked out
all the way through to the point where we
know how the microRNA finds its target and sort
of locks on with the assistance of another protein
that is called argonaut. And then even after the
microA has done its job. Um, WE, we've learned
how the, what happens to the mic RNA afterwards,
it's sort of end of life, uh, process.
Mhm. And uh just to perhaps take a step
back, do we know how microRNA's evolved? I mean,
from an evolutionary perspective, where do they come from?
Yeah, this, this is a great question. So what
we've learned is that microRNA's evolved uh at the
very start of complex life on Earth. So we've
been able to trace microRNA genes throughout all of
the sort of evolutionary history of, of animals to
some extremely simple, just a few sort of cells,
uh, all together. And virtually every organism, every animal
organism that we've studied has some collection of microRNAs.
So what we think has happened is that microRNAs
were really fundamental and critical to the development of
complex life on Earth, simply because they were, they
were present in some of the most simple forms
of life. And as organisms get more complex, we
see the emergence of additional microRNA genes. So they've
looked, for example, at the uh animals that are
have this kind of bilateral body plan, which is
one of the, uh, you know, one of the
simplest uh advances in, in animal complexity. And there's
a big stack of microRNA genes that are present
in those animals. And then if you look later
as vertebrates begin to evolve, you see another group
of microRNA genes that were present at that point
when vertebrate animals evolved, and then further still with
mammals and with placental mammals. So it seems that
the presence of microRNA genes are critical to the
evolution of complex life on Earth.
Mhm. But, but then, uh, let me just ask
you then, they were already present in unicellular organisms
or
not? So they have been detected in unicellular organisms.
But uh the numbers that seem to be present
in multicellular organisms are, are much higher. We've also
detected microRNAs in plants, so they're not unique to
animals and in fungi. And in algae. But, and
this is the interesting thing, the the microRNA systems
in these other kingdoms of life are slightly different.
So what it looks like is uh an example
of convergent evolution where these different kingdoms, these different
branches of life have all come up with the
same solution. They've sort of come up with a
microRNA system to work within the genome. To, to
carry out critical functions. And so that, I suppose,
leads to. The question, what is it that microRNAs
do? What is, what are they needed for? What's
wrong with our genome that it needs this, this
other system? Yeah. So the answer to that is
that gene activity is, is quite noisy and random.
So the, the example I've been giving earlier sort
of doesn't quite capture that as genes are switched
on and off, there's a an element of randomness
in, in how much messenger RNA gets produced. Some
genes are noisier than others, but generally speaking, there's
a, there's a randomness, what we would call stochastic.
Um, PRODUCTION of gene activity. So microA are thought,
they're not their sort of first job or the
first reason that they've evolved is a stabilizing system
for noisy genes. So basically, microRNA's, when they're produced,
they stick onto the messenger RNA and they reduce
protein levels. And this seems to be a negative
feedback system that is ideally suited to noisy genes
to sort of randomness within gene activity. So microRNA
sort of work as this almost like a cooling
system for the genome. They, they reduce the production
of proteins and and that helps reduce the noise
of, of gene expression. So that's sort of their,
their number one job. But the other thing, and
this comes back to what I said about organism
complexity, it seems that microRNAs are able to create
or contribute to more complex organisms. Um, WHAT we
think is happening is that microRNAs can take our
list of protein coding genes and produce much richer,
more complex patterns of gene activity. Than would be
possible without them. So they're sort of taking the,
the, the thousands of protein coding genes and by
acting on them, increasing and decreasing, they, they create
a richness. Of gene activity within cells that that
contributes to more complex organisms that that organisms can
be uh more complex, produce more different types of,
of cells that that uh is is is the
essence of, of complex organisms. So these are those
two really important jobs. So first of all, kind
of creating more stability with gene activity, and secondly,
creating more complex, rich genetic uh activity that that
contributes to organism complexity.
Great. And so, just for people to understand, how
are microRNAs made? I mean, are they produced in
the cells themselves or are they narrated in some
way? How does it work?
So microRNAs are, are produced from a, through a
series of biochemical processes. The the first part is
essentially the reading of the microRNA gene. Now some
of our microRNA genes uh sort of sit on
their own, uh, in the genome, and other microRNA
genes are sort of slightly kind of embedded within
protein coding genes. So if we take the second
example, For the reading of a protein coding gene,
DNA opens, it unzips, and we get the first
processed transcription. We get this production of this long
RNA copy of the gene. And then that begins
to get cut up. So many microRNAs are actually
sort of sitting in that first early form of
RNA and then there's an enzyme within the the
nucleus called Drosha. That cuts out and starts to
shorten the original RNA to a, to a shorter
form. So, that's the, the sort of first step.
So there's the transcription by an enzyme called RNA
polymerase. That produces a primary microRNA and then this
enzyme Droser makes a little cut. And then it
begins its journey. So the pre microRNA now moves
out of the nucleus. Into the cytosol. So it's
now heading towards the ribosome, the protein production factory.
Now it encounters a second enzyme called yer. Dyser
snips. The precursor again, and you end up with
essentially two sort of strands of RNA about 20
nucleotides each. Mhm. One of those strands gets selected
to be the sort of the final microRNA and
it gets bound to this protein called argonaut. The
micronA bound to Argonaut now begins to search for
targets, so it's really basically looking for messenger RNAs
that have a little region of complementarity to the
sequence of the microRNA. And when it finds enough
complementarity, it'll stick on to the messenger RNA. And
this is when it really now does its job.
So once a microRNA is locked onto a messenger
RNA, it can either prevent the translation of the
messenger RNA. So it kind of prevents the messenger
RNA being fed through the ribosome. So it's a
little bit like if you imagine tying a knot
in your shoelace, you can't thread the shoelace now
through the boot. So with our microRNA locked onto
our messenger RNA, the messenger RNA can't get threaded
through the ribosome. We can't build our protein. The
other thing that can happen is that when the
microRNA locks onto the messenger RNA, it causes the
active degradation of the messenger RNA sort of enzymes
are attracted to this and they start to chew
up the messenger RNA. But either way, you get
a reduction in in protein levels of the messenger
RNA that was targeted by the microRNA.
Mhm. But I mean, then their activity is also
always targeting MRNA molecules, right? Or do they have
some other functions?
Principally, it's targeting mRNA. There are, there are one
or two other examples where we've discovered microRNAs doing
something slightly different. There there's one or two studies
that show them working in the nucleus, sort of
at the point of transcription, but by and large,
where microRNA's work is out in the cytoplasm at
that step just before the translation of a protein,
the, the building of the amino acid chain.
Great. So, in the book at a certain point,
you talk about how microRNA's confer robustness to biological
systems. What does that mean? Could you explain that?
Yes, so this comes back a little bit to
what I was saying around how gene activity is
quite noisy. So what microRNAs are doing is this
sort of negative feedback where they, they dampen down
the normal natural noise of gene activity within the
cell, and this seems to allow. Cells to, to
perform better. Cells don't, don't do very well with
sort of noisy gene activity, so this is a,
a dampening system. The second thing that microRNAs do
is seem to stabilize the gene programs that keep
cells the way they are. So for example, you
know, a brain cell wants to remain a brain
cell, it doesn't want to drift into other some
uh cell type. So by producing a certain set
of microRNA genes all the time, Cells maintain their
their correct molecular environment that allows them to do
the job they're supposed to be doing. And this
is what we've seen when we study microRNAs switching
on and off as organisms develop. We find that
there are groups of microRNAs that switch on at
certain phases of development, for example, as cells are
dividing. And then as cells become more and more
specialized towards their sort of final features, other microRNAs
switch on that then keep those gene programs stable
and reduce sort of fluctuation, and this seems to
be really important for that sort of robustness of
of cell type and function.
Mhm. And why do you call these molecules nature's
fine-tuning system?
Yeah, so I think the, the fine tuning comes
from this idea that that microRNA's are, if you
like, gently adjusting gene activity. So by, by certain
types of experiment, we've learned that microRNAs don't absolutely
flatten the level of gene activity. They actually reduce
the level of their, their target protein by about
10 to 20%. So this is a sort of
a a gentle adjustment of gene activity and so
this gives rise to the idea of fine tuning.
But the fine tuning idea also relates to this
sense that microRNAs are a little bit like conducting
the molecular orchestra. This is one of the, the,
the phrases that's been used in the, in the
past, so. One of the features of microRNA's is
there isn't just one microRNA for one target. Each
individual micronA can actually stick onto dozens of targets.
So a single microRNA sort of controls the levels
of lots and lots of messenger RNAs. So this
gives you a little bit more sense of, of
kind of conducting this molecular orchestra, or, or kind
of a fine tuning system.
And so, in the ways they regulate the correct
proteins and amounts of each of them, I mean,
how do they know, I mean, of course, I
don't want to anthropomorphize things very much here, but
how do they know where they get the information
that they should regulate this or that kind of
protein and the amounts?
So the the particular protein they regulate is is
really dictated by the sequence of the microRNA. So
a microRNA will stick on to various different messenger
RNAs according to to the sequence. But in terms
of knowing when to be made. So a lot
of microRNAs are actually made as the protein coding
genes are also being transcribed. So when a protein
coding gene is switched on, it's going to produce
an amount of a microRNA alongside it. So you
sort of have the production of the protein coding
gene and then the microRNA is also being produced
to regulate that same gene. Now that's not true
for all microRNAs. There are some micronNAs that sit
sort of as their own little island within our
genome. They have their own switch on and switch
off signals that regulate them, but a lot of
microRNAs are being produced at the same time that
we're transcribing the protein coding genes.
Mhm. And what happens to them after they've finished
their job? I mean, what happens to the microRNA
molecules?
So this is actually something we don't know in
all that much detail, and it seems that individual
microRNA's, that sort of their end of life is
very specific to the cell type that we're studying,
the, the type of process, what signals have been
sent at a particular time. So there is evidence
that the microRNA stays within the complex with this
argonnat protein, and then the argonautt protein gets destroyed
within the cell, sort of gets turned over, and
as that turnover process occurs, the microa gets released
and then it sort of chewed up by enzymes
within the cell. But there's also some evidence that
there are other types of um mechanism that exists
within cells that directly downgrade the microRNA after a
period of time. But we, we're still really at
a fairly early stage in understanding what are the
rules with what happens to a microRNA after it's
done its job.
Mhm. So, going back to evolution for a minute,
uh, I mean, because of their functions, because they
basically participate in the regulating the amounts of different
kinds of proteins, do they participate in evolution itself?
I mean, do they facilitate Tailor it because uh
that way perhaps cells don't have to evolve completely
new protein coding genes and do they participate in
that as well or not?
Absolutely. And, and I think you've just made the
point really clearly there that It's quite difficult to
evolve completely new protein coding genes, and even a
single error or change in a in a nucleotide
can can have a sort of catastrophic effect on
a protein. This is why we have human diseases
that are caused by sort of single mutations in
DNA. But microRNAs can evolve relatively easily. The the
sort of requirements for a new microRNA gene are
are are relatively easy to meet. So essentially you
just have to have an RNA that can form
this sort of special hairpin structure. And RNAs are
naturally quite good at doing this. So it's true
that within our genomes, the, the production of new
microRNAs seems to Uh, be found around the time
of key evolutionary steps. And from a biochemistry point
of view, it's a lot easier to generate a
new microRNA gene than a new protein coding gene.
And one of the interesting facts about genetic complexity
and and microRNAs is that if we look at
the number of genes, protein coding genes that we
have humans, it's about 20,000. This is actually the
same number of protein coding genes as that simple
worm, the C. ELEGANS worm that Ambrose and Ruin
discovered microRNAs and got the Nobel Prize for. So
clearly Organism complexity is not a simple function of
the number of protein coding genes. It's the other
elements within our genome that take these sort of
protein coding genes and adjust how they're being used
to create all of the complexity that we see
in, in life forms, such as, such as humans.
And microRNAs are a really key part. And so
if you, if you were to sort of draw
a graph of increasing organism complexity. With sort of
single cell organisms at at one end and say
humans at the other end, then the number of
protein codeine genes wouldn't. Be very proportional to complexity
and, and, you know, as I said, the C
elegans has about the same number of protein codeine
genes as we do. But if you were to
plot microRNA abundance, you see a much more linear
relationship. So as organisms are getting more complex, You
see more microRNA genes. So microRNAs are, are thought
to, to, to produce greater complexity than would be
possible simply through protein coding genes.
It's very interesting that you establish that parallel between
us humans and C elegant in terms of the
total number of protein coding genes. So does that
mean that microRNAs also play a role in speciation
because of with them, we don't really need different
and or more protein protein gene code uh gene
coding, uh sorry, protein coding genes, but Uh, the
same, or the sim similar genes can be expressed
differently in different species.
Yes, so what, what we do have evidence for
is that um new microRNAs are contributing to, to
speciation, and this, this is quite difficult, as you
can imagine, to prove in, in some species like
humans, but if you use uh simpler organisms then
it's possible and one of the. Uh, ORGANISMS that's
been studied is a, a, a certain type of
fish, a cilid fish, and they are a great
model for studying speciation, and they found that there
are microRNA genes that are almost certainly responsible for
contributing to, to the, the, the separation, the, the
development of, of new species, but we don't have
so much evidence for that, uh, in humans. What
we do see in humans is the presence of
microRNA genes that are not in any other. Organism.
So there are some human specific microRNAs. There are
also some great apes specific micronAs and then there
are some primates specific microRNAs. And while we haven't
yet figured out what these microRNAs that are unique
to humans are doing, what we do know is
most of them are present and made in the
brain. And so this is very interesting to think
about that, that microRNAs may have contributed to some
of our unique to human uh uh intellectual brain
functions.
So, yeah, we're going to get a little bit
more into that in a second, but what role
do they play specifically in human development?
So microRNAs begin working from the moment of fertilization.
In fact, there's studies showing that some microRNAs are
actually carried within the cell, within the egg, and
within the sperm cell that are basically getting to
work at the first moment of fertilization. And as
the fertilized egg is beginning to divide and divide,
you see certain types of microns switching on. And
then switching off again later. So we've, we've sort
of mapped out sets of microRNAs that are critical
to the very earliest stages of human embryo development
and the development of other mammals and other organisms.
So microns get to work really early, switching on
and off and and controlling the early gene programs
that are critical for organism development.
And so, uh, I mean, I hope I didn't
understand this wrong, but do they also contribute or
play a role in cell differentiation and I mean,
the production of the different kinds of cells that
we can find in our bodies and the bodies
of other animals and organisms?
Yeah, absolutely. So every phase of organism development involves
actions of microRNAs. So we have identified microRNAs that
are important for cell division, for controlling the the
processes during cell division, but also the differentiation and
migration of those cells. So as, as we are
dividing and growing, cells begin to move into different
places, they begin to develop more specialized features. And
at each stage, microRNAs are switching on and off
and controlling the the gene programs that, that, you
know, drive cells towards certain type of uh function
and, and, and also their place within the organism
is all controlled by microRNA.
That's very interesting. So they, because we have different
kinds of microRNAs that might be active in different
steps of cell differentiation, they partic, they have a
big role in the coordination of gene expression,
correct? Yeah, absolutely, and, and they're working in, in
different ways, so there isn't a single way, but,
uh, for example, some microRNAs are switched on to
help shut down genes that are no longer needed
beyond a certain stage of development. Whereas other microRNAs
are producing more sort of subtle effects on on
gene activity, increasing or decreasing levels of particular transcription
factors and other genes that are critical as cells
begin to go down uh particular lines of differentiation
into specialized cell types.
Uh, COULD you give us perhaps a, a couple
of examples of microRNAs that we know are unique
to humans and perhaps uh the roles they play?
So at the moment, the functions that we've been
able to determine for microns are quite limited, but
they're mainly around functions within the brain. What we've
learned about unique to human microRNA's is that they're
at the moment expressed at quite low levels. Now,
this is important because. MicroRNAs that are expressed only
weekly within cells, sort of at low levels, probably
don't have a very strong effect on gene activity.
And what you tend to see is that these
new, if you like, unique to human microAs are
still expressed at quite a low level within the
cell. We think over time, over evolutionary time, the
expression of some of these will increase and become
more and more important for that organism. So it's
still quite early days to to know for certain
what these unique to human microns are are doing,
but it seems to be. Uh, IN terms of
the brain, it seems to be to affect the
number of cells that we have within the brain
and the complexity of the brain cells themselves. So
what we've learned from neuroscience over the last few
years is that a number of cell types within
the brain are, are more complex, more elaborate than
we see in lower organisms. And it's possible that
some of these unique to human microAs are, are
contributing to those very elaborate brain cells that are,
are particularly important for some of the functions that
are unique to humans.
Mhm. And uh are there specific aspects of, let's
say, brain physiology and brain brain cell structure that
we already know microRNAs participate in?
Yeah, there are actually dozens of examples where we've
learned in really great detail what the microRNA is
is doing, what its target is, and by targeting
a particular protein coding gene, how that's affecting the
structure of brain cells. So one of the best
understood functions of microna within the brain is is
controlling the contact points between one brain cell and
another. So if you imagine a cell within the
brain. It receives information from other brain cells. It
talks to other brain cells at these little points
we call synapses. And the synapse is a little
structure where the input from one cell, the axon
comes into very close proximity to the surface of
the next neuron. And on that surface there's a
little protuberance we call a dendritic spine. And this
is really where the input signal is coming from
one brain cell to another. And microRNAs are busy
inside that little structure, that dendrite. Producing the right
shape and even adapting that shape according to the
signals that are received. So microRNAs, for example, contribute
to kind of building up the the spine, the
dendrite, to make it bigger. That's thought to be
important for plasticity within the brain, how we learn,
how we remember. But there are also microns that
contribute to these spines shrinking in size. And sometimes
we want to remove things. We want to get
rid of contact points between brain cells. And so
there's a group of microRNAs that act on the
structural elements, so proteins that actually produce these little
shapes, but also the enzymes that work within them.
So within one of these dendritic spines, you would
have receptors on the surface for neurotransmitter. And the
amount of those receptors on the surface would be
controlled by the microRNAs within. And they've even learned
that as one signal from one nerve cell to
another passes through that structure, it stimulates the local
production of microRNAs that then regulate the levels of
the proteins within that structure. So microRNAs are absolutely
critical for, first of all, Producing the structure of
brain cells, but also making them plastic, allowing synapses
to change, to adjust to incoming information.
Mhm. So, yeah, so they play an active, a
very active role in cell communication, particularly in the
brain, correct.
Yeah, I, there are very few processes, in fact,
that haven't been. Linked in some way to to
microRNAs. So as I was saying um with that
example earlier, the, the, the input from one cell
to another, the end of that is called the
axon terminal. So that also has some very specialized
uh receptors and proteins, and those are also. Regulated
by microRNAs. So almost all of the structures and
functions of neurons are regulated to some degree by
microRNAs, and the estimate is that more than half
of all of the genes within our genome are
regulated to some degree by microRNA, and there's there
probably really isn't a process. Within the cell that
isn't in some way impacted by microRNA.
But you mentioned the receptors, uh, what about the
neurotransmitters? I mean, do we know if microRNAs participate
in any way in the production and release of
neurotransmitters into the synapse or?
So what we know is that the machinery that
sort of loads up the neurotransmitter and has it
ready to be released, the machinery for that process
is also regulated by microRNAs. So the neurotransmitter molecule.
It itself is a is a small, uh, is
a small chemical, it's not a protein, so it's
not directly regulated by micron, but the, the machinery
that gets that neurotransmitter ready for release, all of
those stages can be modulated and adjusted by microRNA.
So perhaps talking now a little bit about some
higher level processes we read in the domain of
psychology here. Do, do, do we know if they
play role, specific roles in human cognition and, and
intelligence?
Yes, so we've learned that there are a number
of microRNAs that are important for the the structure
of the brain, and as mentioned already, there are
human specific microRNAs. So we're at the point where
we're trying to learn what particular micronAs do in
terms of influence particular functions of the brain. And
one of the ways that we can learn what
they do is to to study a model organism,
for example, a mouse. Where you can adjust the
gene more easily than you could have, you know,
you could do in a in a human model.
And by studying microRNAs in these organisms, we've been
able to learn what that microRNA does in terms
of, of shaping brain function and, and shaping cognition.
And so we've identified micronAs that are important for
learning and memory. So perhaps an experiment. Interferes or
removes the microRNA gene and you then find that
uh the mouse can't learn properly to navigate through
a maze. And we can integrate that understanding from
how model organisms work to humans by looking for
human diseases in which we might find microRNA variation
or mutation. And there have been a number of
human brain diseases in which levels of particular microRNAs
are found to be altered or there are perhaps
a mutation in the gene for a particular microRNA
and then By understanding and studying that more, you
can, you can learn a little bit about what
that micron a gene is normally doing based on
what it's not doing in the disease setting.
Uh, COULD you give us an example of one
of those brain diseases that we already know we
have some association with microRNA malfunction?
Yeah, so, so far, most brain diseases that have
been studied have have been found to have some
kind of a microRNA link. Now that might be
that the activity of microRNA genes is a little
bit higher or a little bit lower, or it
might be a sort of genetic variation in a
microRNA gene that, that, that may be responsible for
that brain condition. And so there are examples, for
example, motor neuron disease. This is also known as
ALS. So in motor neuron disease, people have identified
a microA that's particularly abundant in our motor neurons.
They're the neurons that, that produce contraction of our
skeletal muscle. And in those patients, they found that
there were lower levels of this microRNA than normal,
and that that seems to disturb gene activity in
motor neurons, and that if you can kind of
rescue that by putting the microRNA gene back in,
then you can recover some of those functions, and
this is obviously experimental work, but, but has the
potential to go into humans in in the future.
My area of most influence is around the brain
disease epilepsy, and we've identified a number of microRNAs
that are either at higher levels or lower levels
than normal within the brain tissue that is triggering
seizures, which are the defining characteristic of of epilepsy.
And so at this point in time, is it
already possible to use microRNAs for diagnosis?
So at the moment, there are 1 or 2
diagnostic tests out there, really in the cancer field,
which are based on measuring levels of microRNAs, for
example, in the, in the blood. So it turns
out that you can actually pick up, you can
detect levels of dozens of different microRNAs within the
blood. It's they're sort of normally circulating around and
One of the features of microna is that in
the adult organisms, some of them are expressed uniquely
in different parts of the body. So there are
a set of microna that are only ever made
in the brain, microna that maybe only ever made
in the liver. So if you can detect those
microRNAs sort of circulating around in the blood, then
it might be an indication that that organ or
that system is, is malfunctioning. So at the moment,
most of the tests that have begun to be
used in, in the clinic are tests for microna
that have been linked to cancer. It's possible in
the future, and this is one of the areas
we're working on and and many others, that some
of the brain diseases that have a microRNA link
may also have a sort of a blood signature.
Of the disease based on, on particular levels of
microRNAs within the blood. We, we're still working on
that and it's not all the way there yet,
but that we're optimistic that that there will be
a signal from brain diseases that can be picked
up within the blood, um based on the combination
of micronA levels that are there.
And are there already any therapeutic applications for microRNAs?
I mean, is it already possible to use them
to treat diseases?
Yeah, so interestingly enough, the search to develop a
microRNA medicine began within just a few years of
discovering microRNA genes in humans. So microRNA genes were
first found in humans in the, in the year
2000. And then in 2005, uh, a team discovered
that there was a, a virus, the virus for
hepatitis C. Sort of hijacks one of the microRNAs
that we normally make at high levels in our
liver. So there's this micronic called microna 122. The
microns are all numbered rather than given a name
like a traditional protein coding gene. So microny 122
is uniquely made in the liver and the hepatitis
C virus. Replicates and infects liver cells by using.
The, the microRNA within the liver. So shortly after
that discovery was made, somebody thought, oh, hang on
a sec, if we can block that liver microRNA
maybe we can stop the virus from replicating. So,
this triggered um a program of research in a
couple of different companies to try to develop a
medicine that would block this microRNA to treat hepatitis
C. And one of those medicines got all the
way through to human clinical trials, was shown to
be safe and effective. In fact, if you, if
you injected this microRNA inhibitor, you could see levels
of the hepatitis C virus dropping in these patients.
So microRNAs. Have already, if you like, reached human
clinical trials as, as medicines. However, we don't yet
have a medicine that is on the market for
microRNA's. There are a number of companies around the
world, biotechs and pharma companies that are designing either
a microRNA inhibitor or a way to produce more
of a particular microRNA to treat different diseases. In
fact, there was a recent acquisition. Uh, FOR a
heart-based treatment that was targeting a particular microRNA. So
it's an area of very active research, but yeah,
there is not yet a human micro medicine in,
in regular use, but I'm optimistic that uh, that
there will be in the, in the very near
future.
So, let me just ask you one final more
general question. So, with microRNA's, uh, and together with
perhaps some other forms of gene regulation that we've
talked a little bit about at the beginning of
our conversation and things related to epigenetics, for example,
doesn't it complexify the picture of genetics in the,
in the way that, OK, it's not just That
we have particular protein coding genes that produce particular
kinds of proteins. And so whatever genes we have
are directly associated with particular kinds of phenotypes, but
because we have molecules like microRNAs that participate in
regulating particular uh the levels of particular kinds of
proteins and they participate in things like, as we
talked, as we talked about speciation. And, and, uh,
development and stuff like that. I mean, the, the
picture is much more complex than simply having uh
the, the sequence of DNA that produces those specific
kinds of proteins and that lead to a particular
phenotype.
Right. Yeah, absolutely. I think over the last few
decades, there's been a complete rethinking of how genomes
are really working. That for, for, for a long
period of time, the focus was exclusively on protein
coding genes, and now we know that. The vast
majority of the, the genome is, is active in
a way. So. If you actually just look at
the sequences that code for protein, it's only around
2 to 3% of the, all of the DNA
that we have, you know, so only 2 to
3% of our genome is really dedicated to producing
proteins. But 70, 80% of the remainder of the
genome is actively transcribing RNAs and these RNAs are
influencing how genes are switched on and off, how
they're red, how active they are, and microRNAs are
a really important component of that one. A world
of RNA, which is how our genomes really work,
and in particular, how complex genomes, such as the
human genome work. They're basically covered in these other
types of genes that produce RNA. And that RNA
doesn't cope with protein, it remains as RNA. It
functions structurally, it functions as enzymes, regulating, fine tuning
the activity of genes and, and giving rise to
the, to the wondrous sort of complexity of, of
organisms such as ourselves.
Great. So the book is again fine-tuning life, a
guide to microRNAs, your genomes, master regulators. I'm leaving
a link to it in the description of the
interview, and Dr. Henschel, apart from the book, where
can people find your work on the internet?
So the easiest way to search for research by
my lab would be to use PubMed, which is
the, the, the main way that uh most of
the people in, in our field would search for
new publications. So if you look up PubMed, um,
and then you just, you would type in my
name or my name plus microRNA, then you'll see
some of the research that we've published. And equally,
if you're interested in other aspects of microRNA research,
you know, maybe microRNAs and and evolution, you can
also find. That uh through PubMed. Also, the book
itself contains a long list of references to all
of the key points that we've discussed today, as
well as some of the aspects of microRNAs that
that um that that weren't covered. So there's a
rich source of references and reading material within the
book.
Great. So, look, Doctor Henschel, I really love the
book. I can't recommend it enough to my audience,
so I hope that everyone after they've watched or
listened to this interview, runs and buys the book.
So thank you so much for the interview. It's
been very fascinating.
Thanks very much for having me on. Thank you.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnsergoro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearauurumen Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick Punter
Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back medicine,
Gary Galman Sam of Zaledrianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian Price,
Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bortolotti Gabrielon
Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith John
Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai
Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff McMann,
Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke
Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki,
Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin
Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aart, Liam Dunaway,
BR Masud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and
Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers. These
are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden, Bernard
Curtis Dixon, Benick Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden,
and to my executive producers, Matthew Levender, Sai Quadrian,
Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.